Certainly. Is this taping now?
The tape is now on. Anything you say now will be recorded.
Okay.
Mr. Simac, could you give us your background, where you grew up, how you spent your time
as a young boy?
I was born on my grandfather's farm, which stood on the high hills above the confluence
of the Mississippi and Wisconsin River. And I grew up as a farm boy. I went to a rural
high school. We lived in one of the mountains at the tail end of the pioneer period. Most
of us are five families poor and all of our neighbors were poor. We didn't think we were
poor, but we were. We didn't think so because everybody was in the same shape. And I think
a little after high school, I attended a teacher's training course and taught school for a short
time and then went to the University of Wisconsin at Madison, but it did not finish there. I
went on a buddy. I got a job in the newspaper and I've been in the newspaper business ever
since until six or seven years ago.
Okay.
How did you decide to become a newspaper man?
I think there was no decision because I think I always knew what I wanted to write. And I
never really thought of writing fiction or writing books or anything of that sort. It
seemed to me that the way to write was to be a newspaper man. My mother, who was a very
well-educated woman, had books in the house all the time and I read them. We thought, despite
the fact that we were poor, we got a daily paper and she used to set the table by the
light of a kerosene lamp and read it each evening after all the work was done. And I
asked her at one time, I remember, if a newspaper printed all the news that work was. And she,
in the manner of that day, and because people were not as cynical as they are now, said
yes, that's true. And I asked her another question that I thought was important. I said, is all
the news true? Is what the newspaper writes true? And again, that lack of cynicism and
faith that the people of that time had, she said yes, it was. And that, she said to me,
decided to be, want to be a newspaper man. How long were you in the newspaper business
before you wrote your first science fiction stories? No, that's quotation. I started
my newspaper career in 1929 and my first short story appeared in, I think, 1931. And
I wrote, at that time, I wrote several other short stories which were published. And at
about that time, the magazine, the all magazines, science fiction magazines and all others, ran
at a hard time because the Great Depression came along. And so I, there was no market,
no pet, no market. So I dropped out and didn't do any more writing, any other fiction writing
of any kind until I think it was 37 or 38. And I started writing again because the magazines
had come back. John Camel had been named editor of a, of a Stelman. And I felt very short
and I could tell my work to John Camel. So I started in again and I think since, since
1938 and 1939, I think it's 38, 37 or 38. There was only one year in which one of my work
appeared. There was one year that's blank and I can't remember which year that it was.
I have no idea why that occurred. When you began writing fiction, what influenced you
to write science fiction? Because when I was a boy, I had read Julius Wern and, and I think
H. G. Wells, although I don't actually remember the H. G. Wells works, but I must have read
them. Like Alan Poe and the Haggard. And I thought what a wonderful thing that was. I
just had no interest in the field. I wanted to read it myself and I found out when I decided
that I wanted to write, when I found out the newspaper didn't give me everything and I
wanted it in the writing field. I decided that on parts that my spare time I write, I
naturally seemed to turn to science fiction because it was something I was quite a wimp.
I felt very short. I could do the job of this. And I was quite fortunate of course because
there was no competition at that time. If you could string three sentences together and
make a paragraph, somebody would play the story.
Did you have any interest in science when you were growing up?
Some interest. You must realize that at that time science was a somewhat different thing
than it is today. Today science is something that a good many people are interested in.
There are a great many engineers and a great many technicians and just ordinary lay people
who are interested in science. But that time science was another elevated situation, elevated
crap. There were a few great scientists. There were a few engineers, but mostly those were
either mining engineers or civil engineers. There had been very little science and very
little pride at that time. And the public interest in that was fairly low. I was taken by the,
I used to read, I think it was magazine, would it be scientific or what, would it go back
far? I think so. I used to read Scientific American which had some marvelous articles
in it, particularly on astronomy. I didn't understand any of it, more understood very
little of it, but the mystery and the wonder of it, they're taught me by the schools. And
that was the sort of interest I had at that time in it. I don't think very many people
had interest in science the way that they can be said to have interest in science today.
You mentioned when you resumed your writing in 1938 when the magazines had recovered that
you thought you could write for John Campbell. What was in your writing that you thought
would appeal to Campbell? I've read a lot of John Campbell's work. And I knew it was
what I knew at John Campbell was favored what we today call hard science fiction. And I
thought that I could write that kind of science fiction. I did write what a marvelous hard
science fiction for some years and then begin to turn it over to the softer science fiction
such most of which were. Well, most people write self-science fiction today, only a few
in the old hands and maybe a few new beginners write the hard science fiction today.
Some people feel that John Campbell influenced science fiction positively. Others feel that
he influenced it very negatively. What's your assessment of his influence on the field?
I think it's that John Campbell probably made science fiction what it is. He was the one
man who stood there and fought for science fiction and directed science fiction. He was
this, you can't take away from John Campbell anything good that has been said of him.
In later years we became rather hype bound with his opinion and a little big tutorial.
And he was a good influence to start with. I think that probably you can see was a bad
influence. But he lost his prestige as a great science fiction editor. I suppose quite a few years
before he died. There were some of the boys that were writing science fiction friends of
mine that posted that they could tell the science fiction story to Campbell anytime they wanted
because they knew exactly what buttons to push. And if they pushed the right button they knew
they'd jamboree the story. He was that predictable.
You stuck to short stories during your early years. Was this because you were full time
employed as a newspaper man?
Well not necessarily but a short story is the training ground for the novelist. You can
learn a lot more from writing a short story than you can writing a novel. It's shorter
to write, somewhat easier to write. You don't have the time invested in a short story to
write a novel. If you spend as a beginner probably six months or a year writing a novel
and it fails when that's catastrophic. But during that same time you could write perhaps
a dozen short stories and if only one of them sold why okay you have made a beginning. So
you can write a long story and that doesn't apply only to the science fiction field but
to any literature.
According to my information in 1944 the first two stories from City appeared. This seemed
like quite a leap from what I should have written in that it has the dogs and the robots and
the men. Could you give us a little bit of background on how you conceived the ideas and put them together
for that series?
It wasn't weak because I always regard the city stories as a sort of watershed in my writing. I have been
writing the early type of science fiction work up until then. And it seemed to me that something
better could be done than was being done. Strangely enough, at about the same time a number of other
people seemed to think the same thing. There's no accounting for something like that happening.
I think it was my disillusioned by the war that made me write the City series. It's a
terrible period in history. Much of human dignity has been shared away. It was not the kind of world that we had lived in
up until that time. I was far myself wanting to retreat from it. So I retreated from it in my
own mental way by going into another dimension, into another world, creating a sort of a fantasy
of myself as it turned out others also were able to find some refuge. I think if the City series
was written today that they probably would not get the attention that they got back in the early 40s.
I wrote them exactly the right type of stories, exactly the right type. Without knowing I was doing it.
The original eight stories, what kind of time span did they cover as far as your writing them?
I don't know, honestly can't tell you. There were eight altogether weren't there?
Yes, I have the first ones. The first seven were written very well one after the other. The eighth and
final one John Campbell turned down because he said he's not that he'd written that he'd published enough of that of the City series.
And so when he rejected it I simply threw it up on the shelf and figured it was one of my rejects.
And then later took it down and I think I sold it to amazing stories.
And I don't recall what they called it but they put it out as one of their horrible titles.
And then later on when it came out, it came out before my, it was, it was, it joined the others.
But it was the last one was not published by Campbell.
I want to jump up in the future now and then we'll go back. But I want to ask you about the ninth city story Epilogue which came out 20 or 30 years after the others.
What's the story behind this one coming out very late?
Well John Campbell died and of course all of us, all of us were taken by his death because even the comparatively young man and appeared to be in good physical condition.
Some of the writers reverenced him. I'm not too sure I reverenced him but I felt very kindly and very, very badly hit by his death.
And a group of the writers got together and said we'd have to put out a memorial to John Campbell.
And the best way would be to put out the last issue of the oldest telling stories, not analog but the oldest telling stories.
And so they asked, I suppose there were dozen or so people who had written for the oldest telling stories to write a story for the memorial wall.
And Harry Harrison who was the editor told me and he said, Cliff if you would write a story I wish you'd write another city story.
And I was reluctant to do that. I shied awake because it had been quite a number of years since I'd written a city story.
And I knew that I had said I was a changed writer but I was not the same man as I was when I'd written the stories.
I worried a great deal about the propriety of writing another city story because I figured that the last one, the last eight had wound up the story of the Webster family and that there was no need going further.
But the more I thought about it the more I began to see that if I was going to write something for that memorial about volume it should be a city story.
So for the first time since I'd written them I took down my copy of the book City and reread it trying to catch the flavor and the spirit of the stories.
And when I read the stories I simply absolutely ached to rewrite them again because there are some awful crudities in them.
But I knew even as I thought about that that I couldn't do it because if I rewrote them they wouldn't be a city series.
So I sat down and did my best to try to recreate the flavor of the other eight stories.
I think I came very close to it but not as satisfactory as I'd wanted to.
Jenkins is the robot that comes to mind from that series.
Your robots differed from a lot of the early science fiction robots in that they were benevolent. They weren't evil beings.
How did this idea come to you as opposed to using evil robots?
According to Isaac, Isaac Asimov there can be no evil robot. He's got his three robotics.
Robotics all. But I don't think there were too many evil robots. A few maybe but not too many.
But the thing was that most of the writers who had written robots before wrote of them as machines.
And I wrote of them as surrogate human beings.
I made them people with some of the biases and prejudices that the living human would have stripped away from them.
And I tried to make them the kind of people that I would want to live with.
To me, the robot was another person.
And the same thing is true with a lot of my aliens. They are people. They are other people. Other persons.
Had you been exposed to Asimov's three laws before you wrote the city series?
Yes. Asimov homogated the three laws quite a number of years before that.
In his earliest robot story he had the three laws.
I don't particularly hold those laws.
And I don't think a lot of other writers would help with the media because we do have miserable robots now occasionally in evil robots.
But by and large the writing fraternity went along with these three laws and your robot still held to the three laws that he had set forth.
There must have been another element from your life in the books because the city collection is dedicated to Scooty who was Nathaniel.
Was he a little dog that your family had?
Scooty was a Scottish carrier.
We lived with him. He didn't live with us. We lived with him for some 13 or 14 years. He was a great dog.
Now I want to jump into the 1950s. You produced a lot of short stories in the 1950s.
I'd like for you to comment on that. The continuing production of short stories as opposed to novels.
And then how was your newspaper career going in the 50s?
I came to Minneapolis. I worked for 10 years in the newspaper field in the small newspaper field with thousands of, tens of 20,000.
I came to Minneapolis in 1939. I came as a copy editor on the copy desk.
In the 1950s I was a news editor. I was responsible for the entire content of the newspaper with the exception of the sports department.
My career was going very well.
By that time we had a family. We had a responsibility to have a family, a house, a car.
There was a long city for writing then, I suppose, and it had been there earlier years because the money was very well.
I was kidding. I'm sorry, but a few thousand dollars a year made an awful lot of difference in the family budget.
So it was an economic consideration. I suppose it kept me writing, although I was never aware of that.
I always enjoyed writing. I never thought of myself as writing for money, but I did keep turning them out.
I suppose at that time I was far more ambitious than I was in later years and was very much trying to become a decent writer.
This is as good a place to ask this question as any. Aren't newspaper writing and story writing almost on opposite ends of the spectrum as far as how you approach the writing?
And how did you manage to juggle both types?
That's easy because they are absolutely upright. But I compartmentalized my life into two lives.
When I went to work in the morning I was a newspaper man.
And when I came home and sat down at my desk at night I was a fiction writer.
I carried that out as opposed to absolute waste because I never mentioned my writing at the office.
When I was outside writing my fiction writing at the office and somebody came and asked me about it,
I talked to them about it the brief ways I couldn't because I wanted to keep the two lives absolutely separate.
It was an unspoken matter of psychology and a mental attitude because the danger was there and I realized it was an danger.
I think however that newspaper writing does not in any way harm the fiction writer because in newspaper writing you do have to write concisely,
and plainly and so simply so if the reader will not only read it usually but will understand it.
And I think that's important in fiction writing as well.
These stories that were written in the 1950s were you I guess it can be said in your maturity.
And various sources that I've read use the following words to describe it.
Gentle, sentimental, pastoral, warm, bucolic, mid-western values.
Does this basically reflect your philosophy of life?
I would not talk about philosophy of life for a moment. Let's talk about technique and craftsmanship.
Every writer writes from his roots and my roots were in the mid-west and in the rural areas.
I'd always lived in the country or in a small town and when we came to Minneapolis in 1939
we lived in the city only long enough to find a home that we could buy in the country.
I began to think of Minneapolis as my city and I still have a great deal of fiction for it.
It's a small town, it's not a large city, it always says to me it was an overgrown village.
People are friendly, I went down Rock Street through the lunar and I wouldn't go more than a couple of blocks
because before somebody would speak to me my name, maybe stop chatting for a while, it's very friendly place.
And I liked it but I didn't want to live in it.
I don't know about the philosophy.
The man's last baby is so much a part of him that he probably doesn't stop and think about it very often.
He doesn't say, well this is, I'm writing this way because this is the way I think or this is the way I feel.
When you sit down and write, you're writing the way you think and you feel unconsciously without trying to work at it.
Does that make any sense or am I just fumbling around?
That sounds great to me, that really does.
In fact, this is just a comment but I think it's those adjectives that I use that make your writing very popular.
It's nice that you feel that way.
Let me ask a question now.
There are some writers in Ray Bredberry is the one that comes to mind most who use this kind of Midwestern scenery imagery as just a veneer for something that's covering evil.
Whereas you very seldom have somebody in your works that are really, somebody that's really evil.
We just don't see it that much.
Do you just not worry about that or let the other writers handle the evil things and you'll handle these more gentle kinds of situations?
I have never, I think I've never been aware of evil.
I have been aware of friendship and love and good fellowship and honesty too.
I get very concerned at times about the condition of the world, not only now but in times past.
And I know that there is evil.
But I kept at that time, not consciously but simply because I guess I didn't want to think about it.
I concentrated on this because I said before on the things that seemed important to me.
Once again I'm tumbling around.
I'm not doing a very good job.
That's the kind of job you probably like.
But I can't say much more about it.
Now everybody that's listening thinks this is quite interesting so you are not rambling.
We'll ask one more question then we'll run out of tape on this side.
Then there are just a few more questions.
In the 1960s you began producing a lot of novels.
Did you find your stride as far as getting your reputation and getting your foot in the door and then move to the novels?
Or why did you decide to make this move?
I didn't consciously decide to do it.
Simply by the natural progression of events I came to a point where I felt a need to write novels.
Or maybe felt that I was finally a good enough writer, a good enough fast man to write a novel.
It really came quite naturally.
I didn't strain to do it.
I began to find, I think the best way to explain it is that I began to find that I set down to write a novelette.
And it would turn into a novel.
It's just the way it works.
I didn't decide that I'd change from short stories to novelettes,
nor that I'd change from the novelette to the novel ring.
It's simply the way it worked out.
And of course it was, once I wrote a few novels,
I began to see that this is where you could make more money,
that there was more economics in the novel than there was in a handful of short stories.
Thank you.